# Motivation

The FIRST.org Automation Special Interest Group ("Automation SIG") was formed in 2022 after several of its members identified a need to discuss ideas on how to best automate their respective IT security response (IR, CTI, DFIR, etc.). The SIG members documented best common practices in IT Security Automation across diverse use-cases and (sub-)fields of IT Security by exchanging notes and ideas.

While "information sharing" and "sharing is caring" have long been the rallying cries of the infosec community, there hasn't been much guidance on how to (automatically) deal with the given information on incidents or IoCs. As a result, the SIG met to discuss and reflect on the best practices for handling particular use cases and how automation can move the needle in the favor of the defender. Second, this initiative aims to share a list of the existing tools for various automated tasks.

The authors also want to emphasis that automation has various levels and has been there long before the orchestrator era. A ill defined and undocumented procedure cannot be automated. Documenting a process and/or procedures will enable an organisation to begin automating parts of it. In the past, system architects used to try to link software together in an ad hoc manner. Design patterns and a move to APIs and middleware that connects different tools, was the natural step towards the specailsed orchestrators we have today. We are witnessing this change in the security domain. While, non-machine readable playbooks remain an important source of documentation, machine-readable encodings, such as workflows, are crucial for integrating battle-tested best practices and standard operating procedure. 

Note that this document does not attempt to list every potential task that CERTs and CSIRT teams may attempt to automate.  However, the authors tried to identify common tasks across their organisations and addressed those. Therefore, we hope that this document will be useful for the specialised reader - after all, the internet brought us all closer together, but also exposed us the same common (IT security) problems.
